## Chapter 1: Background and Rationale

This Guidebook tackles the old problem of investment programming that confronts public policymakers, program planners and even project implementers.  Being an old problem, there have been many approaches that have been tried and a few have been institutionalized.  The advantage is that we know a lot more about what appears to work and what does not.  The challenge, however, is to reform these institutionalized mechanisms for the better.

Public investment programming has been defined as “the task of formulating the broad, aggregate portfolio of public investments supportive of optimal rural and agricultural growth, where the portfolio is composed of types of public goods and is proposed as part of the development budget in advance of the identification and financing of specific projects and the passage of the General Appropriations Act (GAA). ”  This definition implies that part of the outputs of investment programming is the list of programs and projects that comprise the public investment portfolio.  Some guidebooks on planning state that the enumeration of programs and projects take place during the planning stage.  Investment programming takes off from this list and subjects it to screening and ranking.  Note that the NEDA planning and programming protocol seems to conform to this sequence.

This Guidebook takes the view that investment programming is an integral part of planning.  The process begins with the translation of stated goals (and their desired outcomes), both national and sectoral, into output requirements.  The correspondence with inputs then becomes a subject for the engineers.

In terms of style, this Guidebook is a mix between a Reference Guide and a Step-by-step Instruction material.  A technical appendix is included to discuss the details of some procedures, in order not to digress too much from the main intent of the Guidebook, that is, investment programming.  However, important concepts that should not be overlooked are discussed in the main text.  At the end of each chapter, some review and discussion points are given.  It is envisioned that a capability-building program will be designed to complement the Guidebook and this end-Chapter notes are meant to facilitate discussion and understanding.",

The major difference of this Guidebook with other guides on public investment programming is that it conforms to a different philosophy – it is market-oriented.  This is in compliance to the principles being promoted in the Agriculture and Fisheries and Modernization Act (AFMA) that states:

The State shall adopt the market approach in assisting the agriculture and fisheries sectors while recognizing the contribution of said sectors to food security, environmental protection, and balanced urban and rural development, without neglecting the welfare of the consumers, especially the lower income groups. The State shall promote market-oriented policies in agricultural production to encourage farmers to shift to more profitable crops.

In addition, this Guidebook is essentially a response to a statement in the Project Appraisal Document of the Diversified Farm Income and Market Development Project that challenges the DA to “transform its traditional public sector-led focus on production and supply-driven incentives to a more private sector, market-oriented approach through which the sector can respond to expanding opportunities for agricultural development and raise incomes for small farmers.
